year after year after year, you know,
you work really hard and there's no
reward at the end. You know,
>> I'm burnt out statistically and
anecdotally. So are you. Let's find out
why. Have you ever been burnt out?
>> Yeah.
>> Have you ever been burnt out?
>> Yes. Probably.
>> Yes.
>> Burnt out?
>> Yeah.
>> I think I've come close.
>> Have you ever been burnt out?
>> Absolutely.
>> Have you?
>> 66% of Americans are burnt out at work
this year. In Britain, around 600,000
people reported work-related mental
health issues and 91% have experienced
high levels of stress in the past year.
In China, it's reported that over half a
million people actually die from
overwork each year. They even have a
word for it, Rolousi. The slogan often
perpetuated by Chinese big tech
companies is 996, 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
6 days a week. Philosopher Pascal Shabbo
has put it simply. Burnout gives
expression to the anxieties of our age.
>> Uh what did it feel like? Uh
overwhelming,
>> stressful, tired, worn out, knackered.
>> Uh mentally draining, mentally
exhausted.
>> I've been moved to hear from many of you
from around the world. We'll hear many
of your stories. We'll talk to some
experts. We'll do our history and
philosophy and we'll ask if we're burnt
out, what can we do about it? The term
burnout was coined in 1974 in New York.
Psychiatrist Herbert Freudenberger was
working in a free drug addiction clinic.
Something struck him. It wasn't just the
addicts that had a problem. It was the
staff, too. Freudenberger worked from
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. at a hospital,
then went to the clinic and worked until
11:00 p.m. and often later, sometimes
getting home around 2:00 a.m. He did
this for months on end. People said to
him he needed to slow down. His response
was, "You think I should be doing less?
I should be doing more. There are
thousands of these kids and they have no
place to turn."
In many ways, burnout actually has the
same kind of structure as a drug
addiction. an idealistic goal, a do
anything attitude to achieving that
goal, even if it's at detriment to the
self more broadly. Freudenburgger
noticed, for example, that his fellow
clinic staff were actually often in a
worse state than some of the patients.
Freudenberger wrote staff burnout in
1974 and in it he wrote as a practicing
psychoanalyst I've come to realize that
people as well as buildings sometimes
burn out under the strain of living in
our complex world their inner resources
are consumed as if by fire leaving a
great emptiness inside although their
outer shells may be more or less
unchanged.
>> What did it feel like? um just stressed,
overt tired. Um you start feeling like
simple decisions harder to make and get
to a resolution. Things you normally
deal with dayto-day that are easy become
really hard and you almost get a
paralysis about making decisions on
stuff.
Uh I'm a medical doctor just for context
and in the specialty that I am at that
means really long hours and occasionally
life and death scenarios and I've
experienced burnout like once a year if
I really think about it. I feel it as
like an exhaustion that just doesn't go
away. It doesn't matter what you do in
your free time. It means you start
making mistakes. They could potentially
endanger people and that's really hard
to deal with. The problem is then you
get anxious or you get frustrated as
well and then you can't sleep as well
and then you get more exhausted and you
just like and then you make more
mistakes. It's just like snowballs into
this really really deep bad place that
it's really hard to get out of.
We all have an intuitive sense of what
burnout is. But let's ask ourselves what
causes the fire to burn in the first
place. What happens to us all
individually and society when we get
psychologically
burnt down? What can we learn from all
of this? First, there's obviously
emotional and physical exhaustion, a
sense of overwhelm of not enough
resources or time to do something
properly. But there's also an
accompanying set of negative attitudes.
Cynicism,
insecurity,
depersonalization, meaning a detachment,
a retreating back, a reduction in
sincerity or meaning in one's work, a
kind of numbness, seeing others as just
objects, becoming mechanical.
Those are some of the symptoms. And I
sat down with Mark Roland, the CEO of
Mental Health Foundation UK to ask more
about those causes and what happens with
burnout in general. His answers were
fascinating. Hi Mark, thank you so much
for joining me.
>> Great to be here. Lewis,
>> in your role and from the position of
Mental Health Foundation more broadly,
what do you see as the the root causes
of burnout? Is it as simple as overwork
or is there some more nuance in who
experiences it? Where do you see it the
most? Where is it most a problem? There
are the external drivers of burnout
which I alluded to earlier on which come
around your job design uh the demands of
that job the autonomy and the fairness.
And broadly speaking, if you're in a job
where you're treated unfairly, you have
no control over that job and there are
excessive demands being placed on you in
terms of your time and resource. Almost
anyone is going to find that hugely
stressful and that's going to lead to
burnout. So I think there are some
things that are baked into the human
condition which make being treated
unfairly, not being able to deliver
against unreasonable expectations and
having low levels of control. you know
that shouldn't be considered an illness
in terms of responding to that or some
sort of weakness. Human beings are
designed psychologically
uh for community and protection and
belonging and when that is is is
systematically undermined you will find
a big psychological toll. So the first
set of external drivers is fairly
consistent. We're all in that boat, you
know, and actually this is where where
it comes to resilience is quite
interesting because with burnout
sometimes the most resilient, the people
who believe that they can cope with that
end up creating a bigger problem
downstream than the people who are
saying this is not reasonable. I need to
get help or get out. So there is a
fairly universal reaction to those
external drivers.
>> Okay. So we can add excessive demands,
lack of control and need for autonomy
and fairness to our list of causes. It
often but not exclusively happens in
people facing work, nurses,
psychiatrists, doctors, teachers, social
workers and I heard from many of you in
the US burnout is highest amongst
teachers and burnout is generally higher
in the US than in Europe.
I'm a high school teacher. Like I have
just finished my training and this is my
first year of teaching and I didn't
realize quite how much the pressure was
going to be with the marking and the
dealing with the kids and dealing with
parents more than anything else. It's
just caused me to reach a level of I am
running on fumes and any sleep that I
get isn't as effective as it was before.
And the fact that I have ADHD really
doesn't help. And I am so looking
forward to the 6 weeks off that we're
getting soon. But there's an interesting
tension we'll explore between overwork
and the structure of work, the autonomy
and the control and other things that
Mark pointed to. Compare Freudenberg's
overwork to British MP John Labuk, for
example.
Luk was the British MP behind the bank
holiday act of 1871.
Because of Labuk, us Brits will enjoy
eight national holidays this year. Labuk
was so popular he became known as St.
club among the working class. He wrote,
"Work is a necessity of existence, but
rest is not idleness because to lie
sometimes under the grass under trees on
a summer's day, listening to the murmur
of water, or watching the clouds float
across the sky is by no means a waste of
time. But while he praised the virtues
of idleness, Luk was no slouch. He was a
member of parliament, played county
cricket, played in the 1875 football FA
Cup final, ran a bank, was the president
of the Institute of Bankers, was
chairman of the London County Council,
was counselor to the Queen, was
president of the Royal Statistical
Society and the Anthropological
Institute, was vice of the Royal
Society, and wrote several books
including a two volume pleasures of life
on the importance of rest.
I wanted to start with labuk to make the
point that work can be very meaningful
and it's often about the structure of
work rather than the quantity of work. I
love my work as billions of other people
do. So I think to understand burnout,
it's not just to think about working
less and overwork and having more time
off, although that often is the case.
But it's also about how to make work and
by extension life more meaningful to get
more out of ourselves. Not more
productivity, but more life.
This is why understanding burnout is so
crucial right now. It connects the
personal to the political, the medical
to the philosophical. Plus, it has a
history, a then and a now. And it's
serious. It can be both a warning sign
and it can kill.
Yeah, I think its basic impact can be
extremely serious in terms of degrading
someone's ability to be resilient and be
able to cope with life. And it is a it's
a gateway to then um experiences of
depression, anxiety, even the
experiences of psychosis and uh other
serious forms of mental illness that can
have long and enduring impact. So um you
know it's a bit like it's a bit like
asking how serious is being burnt by
fire and you know you can be burnt by
fire by by scolding yourself. you
withdraw, you recover quite quickly, but
you can also have lifelong scarring
impacts if you're seriously at
thirdderee burns where you're not able
to escape from that kind of exposure.
And so the psychological risk and the
psychological impact really depends. It
can't, you know, it shouldn't be
underestimated.
Love believed that rest was both good
for the soul and for productivity that
idleness can be the wellspring of
creativity. This was towards the end of
the first industrial revolution and
workers had gone from dreadful unsafe
conditions and long hours to fighting
for and winning the 8-hour working day
and safety regulations.
As we talk about a lot on then and now,
history isn't linear. It's complex. What
seems like progress in one area can lead
to regression in another.
Anthropologists have found that hunter
gatherers in general were wellnourished
and only worked around 15 hours a week.
So much so that the anthropologist
Michael Salins called his study of
hunter gatherers like the kung of the
Kalahari the original affluent society.
Some have pointed to pre-industrial
artisan workers as having better lives
prior to the industrial revolution. In
1833, for example, Manchester surgeon
Peter Gascal wrote a book criticizing
the factory system, saying that before
it, he remembered the average person
commonly lived to a good round age,
worked when necessity demanded, ceased
his labor when his wants were supplied
according to his character, and if
disposed to spend time or money and
drinking.
But we shouldn't romanticize the past.
There were trade-offs, of course, big
ones. What happened when famine struck?
when disaster hit, when conflict or
injury or illness broke out amongst the
individual, the family, the tribe, the
group. Historians have also shown how
people were grateful for the steady work
in factories. Farming was temperamental
and very backbreaking work, too. Many
reported it being worse. There's no
simple story, but people certainly seem
to have used to work less. As historian
Joyce Applebee points to in her history
of capitalism, the number of public
feast days declined as capitalism spread
across the 17th to 19th centuries. St.
Monday was often comically pointed to as
the saint of the Monday hangover. Monday
was often referred to as Holy Monday.
Weddings, fairs, fates, feasts, big
celebrations, and days off were much
more common, and hours of course were
much more relaxed, not punched in. Over
the 18th century, the average number of
days worked increased from 250 to 300
per year. Why? Productivity.
Where I live here in the Midlands of the
UK was ground zero for the productivity
movement. 18th century potter Josiah
Wedgwood experimented with different
clay oven temperatures and casts and
worker routines and bells and clocks and
records and canal systems. all to get
costs down and productivity up.
Wedgewood started a tradition of
industrial productivity that led all the
way to Frederick Taylor's scientific
management theories at the end of the
19th century.
Taylor was the father of the efficiency
movement, a scientific approach to work.
He'd stand with a stopwatch, which he
carried around with him everywhere,
measuring every movement of the worker,
shaving off seconds here and there,
breaking up each movement into its parts
and comparing them with each other,
breaking each action and process down
into smaller units as possible, and
redesigning them all from the bottom up
so as to contribute to the most
efficient factory system. Generally, as
people like Markx commented on, early
19th century industrialists wanted
longer, often inhumane hours without
having to waste the time or the
resources or the admin switching between
different workers. In other words, if
working the same amount of hours, just
employing one worker to do all those
hours is better than working two to
split them. All of this led to the
growth of unions and strikes and the
fight for the 8-hour working day. By
1870, hours worked had declined from
around 80 per week to around 60, and
weekends were becoming more common.
People like Luk fought for national
holidays.
Okay, so far so expected. It's a classic
tale of capitalism, right? But here's
the rub. Often when given the choice,
people historically would choose to work
more, too. Up to a point, that is. Hard
work can also be a cage of our own
making. When the Great Depression hit in
the 1930s, one well-intentioned
philanthropic cornflake connoisseur Will
Kellogg believed it would be better to
reduce everyone's hours slightly rather
than sack one set of workers. He
instituted the 30hour work week, a
6-hour day. And to everyone's surprise,
it worked out great. Injuries were
actually less common and productivity
even increased. It was so successful
that they kept it. In fact, it was
great. I'm so sorry. But what happened
next was even more surprising. It wasn't
Kelloggs who changed his mind and asked
the workers to return to their normal
hours, but the workers themselves. In
his book, Work: A History of How We
Spend Our Time, anthropologist James
Suzman writes, "Most workers were clear.
They wanted to work longer hours to take
home more money to purchase more or
better versions of the endless
procession of constantly upgraded
consumer products coming onto the market
during America's affluent post-war era.
And by 1957,
most workers had voted to move back to
the 40-hour work week. This points to
something fascinating. We'll return to
that in a world of productivity, we can
internalize the demand to do more as a
positive, as a cultural positive. But
it's not as simple as giving up and
saying, "Well, the workers voted for it
like turkeys voting for Christmas."
There are wider cultural reasons that
are interesting, too. Economist Robert
Waples looked at the Kellogg's example
and saw the managers convincing workers
of the importance of their work. Over
the period culturally shorter hours were
denigrated and were seen as feminine as
it was the departments that were mostly
women that voted for shorter hours
first. Hard work was sold packaged as
part of the American dream. Waples
writes, "But most importantly, many
workers, especially male employees, seem
to have changed their tastes. They
became embarrassed by the short hours
that they were working, shorter than the
shifts worked by men at other local
jobs. They changed their rhetoric,
downplaying the freedom that leisure
gave them, and asserting that they were
unable to afford a 6-hour shift, that
longer hours were needed to keep the
wolf from the door, feed the family, and
put bread on the table." Waples talks
about something we're very familiar with
today. Productivity coded with masculine
metaphors, a cultural phenomenon being
about more than just the necessity and
the economics of work. But the history
of productivity and work shows us is
that it's not just about economics and
money. It's about culture, politics, and
how economics and wider social ideas
intersect and interact in our minds. And
by the 70s, a new wave of neoliberals
were realizing that to change the
economy, you had to change that culture.
I'm sorry for the noise that you might
hear. I am a seaman currently on a ship
and we're drifting between uh Korea and
Japan waiting to discharge cargo. I am a
high ranking officer on board a chief
mate and I'm responsible for the cargo
and for a huge list of other duties
which should not be covered by a single
night. I've been sailing for the last 10
years. Um, this job has gotten harder
and harder as these private companies
have become more and more tied to this
failing capitalist system and they
started cutting costs at every turn to
satisfy their shareholders. So now the
food is bad. The food was always bad,
but now it's terrible. The linen is
terrible. The supplies are terrible. the
living conditions are actually
unacceptable. So yeah, I go home after 5
months on board. I spent 4 months
recuperating, but after a while it
stopped being enough.
In the 70s, high inflation,
unemployment, oil shocks, lower levels
of profit and innovation, and public
debt challenged the postwar consensus.
That consensus was built upon something
important that I want you to bear in
mind for later. Predictability, job
security, factory work, some gradual but
consistent wage increases, predictable
fordist factory lines that kind of fit
together like a puzzle. Neoliberals
believed this structure was stifling
productivity and innovation. They wanted
a more flexible society. Economist David
Wheel calls it the fissured workplace.
The shift was towards identifying a
company's core competencies and
outsourcing the rest to contractors.
From supply chains to cleaners to
marketing to pensions to training, the
economy became fractured in pursuit of
flexibility to become light-footed. In
the 80s and '90s, entire departments
disappeared overnight. In 1993, Apple
published an article called the changed
nature of workers and work. It said that
more and more companies are laying off
permanent staff and relying on contract
workers and outsourcing to carry out
their business. The emerging workplace
has a head and no body. It centralizes
free floating talent resources as
necessary to meet current needs and
changes size from moment to moment as
the marketplace dictates. We became
untethered and today subcontractors make
up between 40 to 50% of the workplace in
tech. Apple, for example, only directly
employs around 60,000 people out of the
3/4 of a million who work on its
products. And incredibly, one study
found that almost all new jobs added to
the US economy between 2005 and 2015
were this kind of contingent work. So
we've got some key words buzzing around.
Flexible society, contingent work,
fissured workplace. In 1972, a
philosopher and a psychoanalyst, Jills
Delers and Felix Qatari were predicting
that this new information society that
we were moving into, where everything
was in flux, where there was a demand to
constantly encode and recode information
was leading to what they called a modern
man sickness, a new schizophrenia, that
all of this flexibility was going to
have consequences.
And there's this kind of shift I feel
towards an acknowledgment that you can't
avoid the political if you're going to
talk about the causes of these things.
You can't avoid the economic. You can't
avoid the cultural.
>> What do you make of that? Do you think
you have to
>> you you have to engage with that?
>> Listen, that's why that's why mental ill
health is so fascinating for me
personally because it is profoundly
personal and deeply political. you know
the the big the big drivers of mentally
ill health and this is one of the big
reframings like if you experience mental
ill health if you experience burnout one
of the big messages it's not just on you
know that's it's not it was originally
framed like mental ill health was
originally framed through the medical
model like it's a malfunction of your
brain your brain's not working you have
a serotonin deficiency all of that has
been largely de debunked them that there
isn't really um there are some there are
some genetic drivers. Um, but actually
we like to ask not what is wrong with
you, but what has happened to you?
That's a much more helpful framing. Um,
and what has happened to you is a direct
result of how we've structured society
and the risks that we have put in that
we're putting in place to uh that that
people are are routinely facing. And and
so if you've got a context of high
inequality,
we've seen the psychological impact. If
you if you've prioritized uh an economic
system which disproportionately rewards
some and penalizes others, that comes
with a psychological consequence that
we're we're reckon we're reckoning with.
>> Slaves worked all the hours they were
awake. I think like if they can do it,
so can I.
If money is evil, then that building is
hell.
>> How can you not have motivation to get
rich when somebody like me with a head
start like mine is still working 18our
days every single day, 7 days a week
without any day off. I'm going to crush
you. You don't stand a chance.
>> Really?
>> Somebody living on
>> I celebrate dollar a day in Africa is is
getting up in the morning and saying I'm
going to be building.
>> That's the motivation everybody needs.
>> And what do you think caused it? being
slightly understaffed, I'd say. Yeah.
>> Too much to do, too few resources,
>> I'd say. So, yeah, I'd say so.
>> Yeah. So, I got given a new role, but I
also had my existing role to do. So, not
knowing what to do in my new role and
Yeah. to do
>> towards the end of the day where you
would usually have that definite cut off
period,
>> right?
>> That uh sort of slid away and you found
yourself sort of working 600, 7, 8 at
night.
>> Yeah. Know the feeling. In 1983, Time
magazine had this cover. In 2020, it had
this one. This change, I think, is
meaningful because stress, in
particular, has an object, a stressor, a
boss, a deadline, a difficult client, a
problem. We all face stressors, some
good and some bad, on a daily basis.
Anxiety is a much more free floating
fear. It often has no object or at least
the object is more diffuse. It seems to
me that the Fordist economy while having
many stressors was much more
predictable. The neoliberal economy I
know a word so overused now to invite
apathy but let's be clear the economy is
still neoliberal. The neoliberal economy
is much less predictable. Those causes
we talked about lack of control, lack of
autonomy, lack of fairness are
sacrificed at the altar of competition
and productivity. Contractors, gig
economy workers, friends, and even
family can often be jettisoned at the
drop of a hat. It's nothing personal, of
course. It's just that there's so much
choice. always the better option, always
the easier option, always the other
option, always the more profitable
option. We're in a race to keep up.
Let's call it the flexible society. And
in a flexible society, meritocracy has
been both supercharged and distorted. On
the one hand, the best supposedly get
the gig. You can be supremely successful
in a global economy if you're talented,
privileged, or in the right place at the
right time. But the flexible society
supercharges downward mobility, too.
In fact, whereas for decades, maybe even
a century, upward mobility was not just
the norm, but expected that you would do
better than your parents, today,
downward mobility is increasing at a
pace faster than upward mobility.
In the US, research shows that a child
born in the 1940s had a 90% chance of
earning more than their parents. For
children born in the 1980s, this figure
dropped to about 50%. Since the 80s,
we've seen a great decoupling of GDP
growth from real median earnings. GDP
continues to rise, but the gains go to
the top. Over the past 40 years, to take
one statistic that we're so familiar
with, CEOs have had an almost 1,000% pay
increase, while average workers have had
just a 10% increase. Again, you now have
roughly the same chance as doing poorer
than your parents than you are as doing
better than them. Upward or downward
mobility, flip a coin.
On top of this, extreme inequality puts
pressure on almost every resource except
mass producible consumables. On housing,
on education, on healthcare, on
politics. The richest can outbid the
poorer on any commodity that's slow to
build or extract or produce, pushing up
prices of assets. They can avoid taxes
around the world, can buy up media and
political access, keeping up with the
Joneses, in short, is pretty impossible
when the Joneses are flying on a SpaceX
rocket. This is not just a video about
inequality, although that is the
unignorable star of almost every story
right now, but it's also about lack of
time, lack of control, resources,
autonomy, and fairness. And we have to
separate these things out to understand
them properly. But what's
philosophically interesting to me is the
unignorable link between a flexible
society and an insecure society. If
society is flexible, you can be let go
of, you can be jettisoned. You can be
ignored. You can make it or break it.
You can be going up or you can be going
down at any moment.
Technology, the internet, globalization,
consumerism, tourism, ease of travel,
cultural changes, all mean we are
culturally, socially, professionally and
personally flexible as well as
economically flexible. We are
postmodern, untethered, presented with
numerous opportunities, places to go,
jobs to take, hobbies to pick up, people
to see. There's so much to do, so many
choices, so many demands. If burnout is
in some sense the fear of insecurity
that comes with the flexible society.
Because remember, if you can be flexible
with people, then people can be flexible
with you. Then this applies to longevity
of relationships, to divorce rates, to
moving away from family to get a job in
the city, to not looking after elders,
to not committing to one hobby or
profession because there's always
another choice. There's always more to
do. When there's so many things to do,
so many possible options, we're judged
on how many of them we've done, how many
we've achieved. Have you slouched on the
couch or traveled the world? The demand
of meritocracy in an unequal world
especially is that you're expected to do
more and more with less and less to make
it from nothing. That is the marker of
productive iron excellence. Right?
As an Helen Peterson describes in her
book, Can't Even, Millennials were the
first generation to experience this kind
of pressure to do as much as possible.
They had all sorts of calendar entries
for extracurricular hobbies and games
and practices and tryyous, leagues,
lessons, dance, music, homework, summer
camp, theater school, swimming, and
endless exercise in producing a longer,
fuller, more enriched CV. In the book,
The Overachievers, Alexandra Robbins
writes that when teenagers inevitably
look at themselves through the prism of
our overachiever culture, they often
come to the conclusion that no matter
how much they achieve, it will never be
enough. It's all about getting that good
university spot, that great placement to
prove your worth in the meritocratic,
flexible society. Petson points to
something that resonates with me, too. A
generation of parenting that was pretty
handsoff, almost entirely unsupervised
for long periods of time with both
parents out working for the first time
in history and for good reasons. But
that means a lot of time spent alone. A
lot of time maybe generating anxieties
and insecurities.
She points to sociological reports, for
example, in which children describe
endless hours of trying to entertain
myself. This, I think, is a strange
combination. Half the time entirely
alone, insecure, maybe disconnected,
potentially anxious, and the other half
full of demands. The demand to do, to
achieve, to prove as much as possible.
The great enlightenment philosopher Gil
Kagel realized that recognition was a
central if not the central feature of
how we understand ourselves and think
about ourselves self-consciously as
social creatures in relation to and
recognized by those around us.
We recognize and are recognized by
others. And how that happens, the way in
which that is structured has
consequences for who we are, how we
think, and what we do. We are watched,
judged, rejected, or accepted. We're
admonished. And to paraphrase the
anarchist thinker Pierre Prudon, we're
inspected. We're spied upon, directed,
luddriven, numbered, regulated,
enrolled, indoctrinated, preached at,
controlled, checked, estimated, valued,
censored, commanded by creatures who
have neither the right nor the wisdom
nor the virtue to do so. In a flexible
society, the anxieties of recognition
become hyperfocused
when we can be dropped at any moment.
When we can move anywhere, go where we
want, hypothetically,
flick through dating apps indefinitely.
Follow and unfollow anyone at will.
Contract and hire and rehire and
freelance when we want. Review and be
reviewed at all times. how much we
achieve, what our CV shows, what our
record shows, plus a decline in
traditional cohesive communities,
families, a lack of linear security, a
lack of enough resources to do the job
effectively contributes to the race to
achieve more and more and not to stop,
to both be insecure, anxious, and always
on.
Jean Paul Sartra agreed with Hegel on
the importance of recognition when he
said famously that hell is other people.
He was talking about the effect of
eternal judgment. The what are you
worth? The type of judgment that has
been accelerated by another feature of
human life, technology.
Okay, a quick then and now recap on the
importance of historicizing. How we talk
about these things has changed over time
and that matters. Our language, our
culture, our history can have a direct
effect on our health. As the historian
Roger Coutin reminds us in this book,
even the body has a history. And as Mark
told me, mental health contributes to
23% of the overall disease burden.
Should we then be stoic? Should we be
Buddhists? Should we be cognitive
psychiatrists? All of these are
historical. They're given to us
historically, and our culture is like a
reservoir we draw from. So, it's crucial
that reservoir is well filled. Stress,
for example, is a relatively new medical
concept, first studied as a medical
concept in the 1930s.
Stress before was an industrial
metaphor. the stress placed on metal,
for example. And before stress, the
American psychiatrist Charles Beard
coined neurosthenia, what he saw as a
modern illness affecting Americans
nervous and anxious about modern life.
Interestingly, he blamed steam engines,
the media, the telegraph, the speed of
materialism for putting too much
pressure on people. He wrote, "The
perfection of clocks and the invention
of watches have something to do with
modern nervousness since they compel us
to be on time and excite the habit of
looking to see the exact moment so as
not to be late for trains or
appointments before the general use of
these instruments of precision in time.
There was a wider margin for all
appointments. We are under constant
strain, mostly unconscious, oftentimes
in sleeping as well as in waking hours
to get somewhere or to do something at
some definite moment. A quote that's a
great reminder of how mental health, how
we think about it, is historical. It's
determined by what's around us. Before
neurosthenia, there were the four humors
that might have been disbalanced,
disregulated in the body. There was
melancholy and hysteria. There were
religious maladies and ancient ones,
too. There were culturebound syndromes
that only exist in certain cultures. My
point is this. Mental health is
structural and historical. It does not
just come from us, but happens to us
too. It's dependent on all sorts of
historical, social, political, economic,
and cultural factors all in a
relationship with each of us
individually.
>> Do you guys think the causes were when
it happened?
>> Lack of awareness on how to censor
myself around technology.
>> So, you think it's a technological
problem?
>> I do. I think it's massively predicated
in social media. So, we've got this
thing that can do everything that's
super addictive, but it comes with no
instruction manual on how to use it,
>> when to turn it off, when to use it,
>> when to engage like this with no
technology or go for a walk or get into
nature. So, yeah, I think I think that's
the big the predicator is that. Yeah,
here's a brief list of apps that I use
every day. Google Docs, Sheets, Drive,
One Drive, Microsoft Word, Excel, Adobe
Premiere, Photoshop, Slack, YouTube
Analytics, around four email accounts
for some reason, WhatsApp, Garmin
Connect, X, Facebook, Instagram, two
accounts, Reddit, many different news
apps, you get the point. Add in your
favorite wider modern phenomena, plus
train timets, child care hours,
different schedules and calendars and
alerts and notifications and duo lingo
reminders and meal planning notification
and bank apps and Fitbits. All of which
have managed to circumvent personal
boundaries by alerting you in your
pocket. We are continually plugged into
the world. We are continually available,
contactable. Do you think uh technology
has something to do with this as well
then because you're always connected can
always be working it's always there.
Yeah, I mean not long before that
started using Microsoft Teams um which
became invaluable. You know, it was like
that's become the sort of de facto way
of communicating. Still is for us to be
honest with you. Um so you were kind of
always on almost and definitely if you
saw something ping at 7:00 at night, you
were more inclined to. We're surrounded
by demands, the extra stuff we have to
do at work. And that was once in many
ways more siloed off someone else's
responsibility. Now, we can all
potentially do everything. I mean, I get
burned out keeping up with cameras and
lighting and audio and algorithms and
demonetization and thumbnails, and I'm
very fortunate. Some of the messages you
send sound almost unbearable to me. I
would crumble. I put this to Mark.
>> Burnout is the manifestation of repeated
stress. I mean, I see burnout as being
the gap between the demands that are
consistently placed on you and your time
and resources to be able to meet those
demands. I don't want to get all
Prometheus and Frankenstein on you,
although of course there are classic
literary lessons here, but what's
happened when we've become slaves to
technology? In the 1930s, the economist
John Maynard Kanes famously predicted a
15-hour work week by 2030. Now, we're
around 5 years off, and I'm going to go
out on a limb and say it's not looking
good. Big tech corporations that
dominate international economies and
have an effect on every other company
and corporation and all of our lives
actually employ very few people
historically speaking. While being in
control of some of the dominant flows of
economic revenue, take Uber, just one
example. It's worth around $200 billion,
but employs just 31,000 people. And many
of those are high earners. That sounds
like a lot, but around 8 million people
drive for Uber and of course don't have
the relationship with Uber that they
would have had with a traditional
company. There's been a lot of
discussion, for example, about burnout
amongst gig economy and Uber workers.
anxious about the algorithm, about
always being signed on, about customer
reviews, about surge pricing. There's
always a pressure to log on and do more
to make ends meet. This 2022 British
Medical Journal study concluded that gig
workers reported mental health and life
satisfaction worse than those employed
full-time and part-time, but better than
the unemployed. Mediation analyses show
that this was explained by their higher
levels of loneliness and financial
procarity. And Uber drivers in the UK
recently told this BBC reporter that
Uber increases commission and drivers
cannot see what the passengers actually
paid. It's unpredictable. Uber used to
take 20% and then up to 41% often
arbitrarily while drivers have struggled
to make ends meet. Many say that the
promises are not the reality. And this
is the thing with burnout. Every turn we
take, we kind of risk going down into a
huge other topic that's related and
important, but I can only hint to here.
All of these deserve wider analyses
because Uber is just one example of tech
inequities exacerbating inequality and
burnout. We hear often that tech in
particular has this kind of hustle
culture built into it that trickles down
the ladder. I talked to tech workers
union member Simona about this. there's
a level of tolerance and pushing that is
embedded in the culture from the 60s
like uh you know the Californian
hustle kind of attitude was where the
culture of you know tech was born and
even if you go to Italy there there are
still these elements of like hustling
culture that are completely alien to
other sectors for example so
>> Uber is only the most obvious example.
Microsoft managers can access employee
chats, emails, calendars, measure
productivity. Companies like Amazon
known for tracking toilet time and
outsourcing as much to cheap foreign
markets as possible. The point here is
that burnout is a technological
phenomenon as much as a medical one. And
so any solution has to reckon with how
we're connected to each other in which
ways we are recognized through the
electronic tools that we use. The
uberification of society risks taking
over everything. It is the model of
productivity and efficiency over
humanism. Everything becomes a hustle, a
grind from driving to just being
artists. On Twitter, the artist Adam
Jarts wrote, "Do what you love and
you'll never work a day in your life.
Work super [__] hard all the time
with no separation and no boundaries and
also take everything extremely
personally." Resonates with me. The owl
of Manurva flies at dusk when the candle
is almost burnt out. Do we have to go
through burnout to get to the other
side?
>> Did you do anything specific to get over
it?
>> I think it's just a case of managing my
emotions. I'm probably someone who gets
really involved in in my own work. So,
it's probably just a case of I need to
be uh led to become more in control of
that.
>> You may have noticed a conspicuous lack
of the C word, capitalism. This isn't
because burnout isn't a symptom of
capitalism. It may be the symptom of
neoliberalism in the same way stress
might have been the symptom of fordist
capitalism. Instead, I avoid it because
it's implicit in almost everything we
do. It is the water we swim in. And in
saying it's capitalism, we risk it
becoming thought terminating both in
ourselves and in people it might put
off. As if saying capitalism is just the
answer to anything. Instead, I want to
think about what burnout reveals about
capitalism and how it can help us
formulate responses to its pathologies.
What I mean is, it's easy to say a lack
of resources and intense competition
causes burnout. But what could be more
revealing is asking what being burnt out
can tell us about a world that's burning
us. Because, as we've seen, burnout is
about more than just simple working
hours. It's about a relationship between
many things. Work and capitalism, time
and technology, a dark side of
meritocratic culture. It's about
psychology and sociology, too.
>> So, I think a lot of people think about
burnout as a whole, and it's one of
those phrases that's often just
overused. The year before last, I had my
own experience of severe burnout that
did lead to my own little breakdown. And
I think that was just due to being so
overworked and when you're in training
as well, it's kind of the exhaustion is
there from day one. So when you add on
all of your your training, your
placements, the fact that it's unpaid
while still not trying to manage a job
role, and in my case, I was doing a
psychology degree on top. It was just it
was a lot, but you don't really it's not
just like you can pull a sick day um if
things are getting too much. You're
always thinking about how your actions
will impact the clients you work with.
So even if you're feeling awful, you
likely still go ahead with your with
your sessions. It's very common.
>> In this book, stress expert Steven
Hobful has argued that the cognitive
focus on mental health has meant we've
ignored the sociohistorical causes of
mental health. He says that I argue that
resources are the primary unit of
interest in the stress process. But of
course this is a resource problem. Of
course we all need more time, more
breaks, more holidays, vacations, money,
staff, energy, capacity, more resources.
But saying that doesn't make it so. The
more interesting point of analysis is
how does burnout actually help us get
more of what's needed? What can we learn
about it? Burnout is a radical
potentially revolutionary concept
because unlike say anxiety, burnout
makes the link between mental and
economic spheres clear between in here
and workplaces and the economy and the
political unignorably explicit. It's
easy to say we need to fix inequality.
It's more interesting to ask how can we
use burnout to contribute to that
problem. The historian Carl Schlott
talked about thinking with history
rather than thinking about history.
Let's think with burnout. So there are
two ends of the analysis that we can
approach burnout from as a problem. The
individual and the societal. One obvious
issue is that the societal model feels
so insurmountable, out of our control,
structural, beyond us. Shabbo puts it
like this. Society is perceived as a
selfish and destructive giant. We
ascribe to it a colossal amount of power
dwarfing that of our unconscious desires
and that we are a defenseless child
breath of resources. But the societal
model of course ignores the individual.
our individual lives, neurosis, inner
conflicts, traumas, psychologies and
position in the world out on the world.
The only response is a relational one.
How in what ways are we connected to
society? In what ways do we make society
and are molded by it?
Let's start with what happens to the
individual when they're burning out.
Then we can look at what that means for
how we approach burnout on a societal
level more broadly. The psychologist
Gary Churnis points to three stages of
burnout. The causes, as we've seen, are
lack of resources, demands that exceed
our need for autonomy and control,
fairness, and insufficient rewards for
our work. And the results according to
Churnice are stage one is stress, an
imbalance between resources and demands.
Stage two is emotional tension, fatigue,
and exhaustion. And stage three is
changes in our attitudes and behavior.
This is where depersonalization and
cynicism and coping mechanisms, maybe
addictions, come in. Philosophically, I
find cynicism fascinating.
Depersonalization and cynicism result in
a collapse in meaning in our
perspectives on life. Psychologist
Christina Maslac, very influential
thinker on burnout, writes that people
are becoming cynical, keeping their
distance, trying not to let themselves
get too involved.
Cynicism is a loss of idealism. It's
important and useful to see how burnout
is most common in places that seem most
human, most humanly important. teaching
children, caring for the sick, the
addict, the maternity ward, places so
full of what's called moral injury,
where workers are called upon to do
things and make difficult choices that
strain or go against their moral or
ethical beliefs.
As a medical provider, my therapist and
I have discovered that much of my
burnout comes from moral injury. I don't
have a reliable method of helping my
patients access resources to address
basic needs like safe housing, adequate
and nutritious food, or medical care on
a regular basis. Psychiatrist Alexis
Burger writes that in a stressinducing
situation, the natural behavior
exhibited by animals is a fightorflight
response. But in a care-based
relationship, which by definition
represents a concentration of difficult
interactions, one can neither escape nor
attack, one is obligated to stay, even
if one finds it unbearable.
You have to stay, but you mentally check
out. Depersonalization means becoming a
robot. sometimes even becoming negative
and cynical not just towards the system
but towards the receiver of your service
or more worryingly your care. The most
influential philosopher of burnout is
the South Korean thinker Biancho Han.
Han frames burnout as happening in a
permissive society where everything is
possible, everything is allowed,
everything is potentially achievable.
The flip side of this world of
positivity is that it demands an excess
from us. We used to live in a
disciplinary society. Many more rules,
obligations, duties, prisons, stricter
punishment, stricter education. But we
now live in what he calls an achievement
society. Should is replaced by can.
Everything is possible. The major
psychological difference is that in a
disciplinary society, we're exploited by
an other. In an achievement society, we
autoexloit ourselves often voluntarily.
Han writes, "Excess work and performance
escalate into auto exploitation. This is
more efficient than aloe exploitation.
That's exploitation from the outside.
For the feeling of freedom attends it.
The exploiter is simultaneously the
exploited. The hand talks about our egos
bursting open. That we're standing
utterly alone. Everything is on us. Our
successes, our failures, the world.
Hans's Burnout Society is a short but
complicated book. There's a section I
find particularly different and
insightful. He says that in an
achievement society we must be
selfstarting
but he says it's impossible to reward
oneself.
The achievement society appears as
meritocratic. Everything is on us as
individuals to perform, to do, to be, to
choose, to dream. It's the society of
freedom and individuation. That sounds
great. But what if that's precisely
what's wrong? What if, as Hegel said, we
are psychologically, maybe even
evolutionarily,
entirely bound up with notions of
recognition from others? What if we
cannot avoid recognition? that it's a
constituent part of our logical and
emotional regulation, but that we've
become so free that we only recognize
the goals, achievements, ambitions,
performance, that we set ourselves,
that we only recognize ourselves, that
we live in a society where we only have
ourselves to blame, where we auto
exploit ourselves. We're expected to be
achieving, doing, performing, choosing,
dreaming based on our lone desires. We
are free, but maybe we don't want to be.
As the sociologist Richard Senate says,
self-absorption does not produce
gratification. It produces injury to the
self. And Hank calls it the violence of
positivity.
He points out that in this kind of
society, we actually avoid achieving our
goals by always moving on to the next
goal. We cannot celebrate. We cannot
stop. We cannot be for just a second
because the next achievement, the next
thing, the next goal always beckons us
forth. A society of the individual self
ironically becomes a society of self
sacrifice.
At the end of the 19th century, the
sociologist Emil Durkheim talked about
what he saw as a consequence of the
breakdown of moral and social guidance
and glue, social values. He described it
as an he thought it led to quote a
malady of infinite aspiration that was
the result of those who quote no longer
know what is possible and what is not
what is just and what is unjust which
claims and expectations are legitimate
and which are immodderate
this is Han's point we auto exploit
because we cannot learn these things
ourselves alone no man is an island we
get them in some away from interaction
with and pressures of the wider social
group. Sociology becomes psychology.
That leads to a kind of worrying
question. Is it the flexible society
that leads to auto exploitation? And
more worryingly, is it freedom itself
that leads to auto exploitation? Having
too much choice, having too many things
to do. Do we need to seek the cure
unintuitively? maybe in some kind of
unfreedom in some kind of positive
exploitation.
And what I mean from that is giving
ourselves over to a positive structure
that in some way
leads us to being not burnt out that
tells us when we can stop that demands
that we stop at certain times. Whether
that is a positive social life, culture,
politics, economics,
freedom itself becomes overbearing.
Think about a Sunday. A Sunday is a way
in which we have society determined
almost by compulsion that we must rest.
It's as old as the Bible. That's how
long it has to be in place for it to be
unignorable.
And even then, I find the pressure to do
some work on a Sunday uh quite difficult
to resist. Listen, there's probably
sometimes that, you know, my wife will
say I'm guilty of it just now, but
certainly not to the the level it was,
you know, back in those days. And um
things have pretty much got back to to
mostly normal, I would say, on that
front.
We've prioritized freedom and
flexibility over community and security.
Some kind of normative idea that comes
from the community. And I don't mean
community and security in a kind of
naive vulgar way. I mean security
metaphorically almost as if anchored to
something where something comes from
something expected and routine that you
can set your watch by. And we've done
all this. We've prioritized that freedom
and flexibility for some very very good
reasons. Innovation and freedom and
individual choice. that flexible
society, but maybe we've tipped the
balance a bit too far.
>> What changed?
>> As you've experienced it once, then
noticing the early trigger signs.
>> Interesting.
>> Um, so once you've experienced it once
and you go, I got myself to a point that
I had to take some defined measures the
second time, third time around where you
go, there's some early trigger points
here. I can make adjustments sooner.
>> Be aware of the trigger points. Yeah,
>> I like that.
Han points out that multitasking is an
attitude that doesn't represent
civilizational progress. It is in fact a
regression because it's so common place
among wild animals. He says it's an
attentive technique indispensable for
survival in the wilderness
or delurs and claim that we've become
schizophrenic. This is a complaint I
often hear from my own mouth. It's too
much. I open my e-reader thing and have
hundreds of books to flick through
different chapters, different
paragraphs. I get overwhelmed by the
choice. It sounds like from a lot of
you, you have similar issues that at
work you have too many things to juggle.
It's almost not about the workload
sometimes, but just keeping track of all
the things. It's a burden on the mind.
Let's contrast the flexible society with
linear security. Institutions like
guilds, unions, families, clubs, even
monarchies or tribes or businesses have
some kind of what I'll call linear
security baked into them. They're
structured to endure linearly through
time. Linearity aims to predict. It aims
to control and somewhat secure the
future for the members of the group so
that you know what to expect from each
other, from the environment, from the
wider norms. You can quite literally set
your clock, set your watch to that
linearity. You can see the future.
Linear security is somewhat formulaic.
going to see family on a Sunday,
regulating workplaces, having routines
and schedules, having a standard wage,
say a predictable increase over time,
going to the same church, reading from
the same hymn book. These are all forms
of linear security.
In many cases, linearity is the death of
creativity and innovation and freedom.
Guilds controlled and heavily regulated
their profession up to the point that
you couldn't legally do the thing that
you wanted to do without being part of
the guild. They controlled it for
reasons like controlling prices and
wages and making sure people couldn't
cheat and and and circumvent the
authority of the people already in the
profession. This of course will stifle
in many ways the other pole, the
freedom, the creativity, the innovation.
The security model is linear and
predictable. It is in many ways safe.
The flexible model is unpredictable and
chaotic, but it is creative and
innovative. Of course, we need a balance
between the two. But it's interesting
that Han uses the word wilderness that
multitasking reminds him of animals in
the wild because it's similar to the
distinction that nature drew between
what he called the Dionician and the
Appalonian spirit. That is the kind of
wild and the regulated, the disordered
kind of bubbling up from underneath and
the imagery and the lines and the words
and the reason that we use to describe
it. the logic on top. Nze believed in
the period he was living in that they
needed more of the Dionician. But he
also believed that a healthy culture
integrates both.
Are we too flexible? This may sound
counter to how many of you feel burnout,
how you feel it in the body, how you
think about it. How are we too flexible
when it feels like you have no
flexibility, no freedom, you've got too
much to do, not enough choice in your
personal life, not enough work life
balance. As we saw, burnout often comes
from a lack of autonomy, of having too
many demands placed on you. That doesn't
seem flexible. But that sense of
overwhelm is from having too much to do,
which is a sense of too much
flexibility, too much multitasking, too
many things to juggle. Plus, it's a
result of too much flexibility or the
possibility of too much flexibility up
the chain that's exerting pressure on
you down the chain. The flexibility of
the economy, of politics, of contract,
the flexibility of tech, of always on,
of having to achieve many different
things, of the race to the bottom. They
all hover above, pushing down on us.
Burnout is often referred to as a mirror
disorder. It's society reflected back
into us, society reflected onto us.
molding us, shaping us. When I read
Nature's descriptions of the Dionician,
and I'm simplifying quite a lot here,
but it feels to me very much like the
frantic, disregulated
overwhelm that accompanies burnout.
Remember, this isn't just a positive
negative thing. Sometimes we need the
Dionician. Sometimes it expresses itself
in a good way. And sometimes it's too
much. It's overbearing. And we use the
appalonian to kind of pen ourselves in
to limit us to know what we're doing
predictably. But the kind of dionian
energy that accompanies burnout seems
very much at odds with the kind of 19th
century structure that nature was
writing in where morals were handed down
and acted upon from the priesthood.
An interesting finding, for example, is
that role ambiguity is moderately to
highly correlated in studies with
burnout. This happens when there's not
enough information to do a job well.
Nurses often report it. Lacking
supervisor support also has been found
to have positive correlation with
burnout. Lack of feedback, too. And this
is the point. It's often not just the
work overload, but the structure of
work.
>> Hi Louis and team. Uh my name is Lily
and I was a mental health direct support
professional um during CO here in
Minneapolis, Minnesota in the United
States. The burnout that I experienced
in my role was so great. I genuinely
feel lucky to have survived. Um I was
working 10 to 12 plus hour shifts. um
six, seven days a week almost because of
personnel that left with their you know
uncomfortability in COVID. Um it was a
really scary time. I remember having to
wear a hazmat suit and it got so bad
that I developed alipcia and when I saw
the physical representation of my stress
so clearly evident as a bald spot on my
head, I had to stop. I took a leave of
absence and um spent some time
recovering. And after reflecting on it
for a really long time, I realized that
I just simply couldn't work in that
field anymore. The stress was too great,
on my body, and on my mind. On my mind
also because uh I didn't feel like I was
properly caring for people. Our model of
mental health care in the United States
does is not actually conducive to
well-being. So couldn't do it anymore.
Anyways, thanks.
And again, I'm very aware here that my
burnout is nowhere near as bad as many
of you and that my work situation is
highly specific in particular. It's not
universal. And I have no idea what it's
like to work in a Manchester office or
an American hospital or education in
India. Take your pick. But this kind of
dionian mix does resonate with me. the
idea that we are both overly free and
overly flexible and that that comes with
a kind of role ambiguity and a lack of
supervisor support and feedback that
really resonates with YouTube work
because as mentioned there's a lot of
different things to juggle fine but
there's also the sense that the
algorithm is kind of out of your control
and that social media platforms have
moved away from the regulated linear
subscriber model where I have some level
of confidence confidence that I can
publish a video and you will all for the
most part see it. This has now moved to
the flexible model where the videos
served are the best performing, most
clickable, most viral videos with the
most explosions on the most
sensationalist topics regardless of
whether you've subbed or not. I've heard
from many YouTubers who are experiencing
this. Chuck in AI and we're all pretty
anxious.
As Patreon founder Jack Conti recently
talked about in this video, this is
terrible for creators for stability, for
quality over the long term, which is
also why it really helps me if you click
that bell and join us on Patreon and
other socials. You can watch ad free and
early. You can just keep up on Patreon
for free. You don't even have to pay,
but there are bonus videos. Join the
community. It's great. I'll leave a link
below. It's more of a grind though for
me to get seen by the algorithm over
time because there's less and less
linear security in the algorithm. We
need mechanisms for linear security. The
point of linear security is to regulate
the components that are working together
in some way so that each part can work
effectively with the whole. It's a
little bit like a car. You could say,
well, okay, each part can do whatever it
wants to perform as well as possible. We
want a high performance society. And so,
one overachieving wheel in the car says,
"All right," and shoots off. An engine
part spins out of control faster and
faster. The exhaust overheats and the
car bursts apart. That's what burnout's
like.
There has to be some agreement between
components. And in this case, the
components are us. The incredibly
frustrating thing about burnout is that
like car wheels shooting off and burning
out, it seems so obviously inefficient
and pointless. No one, most employees
included, wants a burntout workforce.
Mark told me that 23% of the disease
burden in the UK later on comes from
mental health issues earlier. Stress and
burnout and adaptive behaviors like
drinking and eating and addiction.
If that's the case, prevention at the
beginning isn't just a wishy-washy ideal
of a compassionate society, a humane
society. It's entirely consistent with a
productive, efficient, high-erforming
society, too.
>> I asked Mark why he thinks we don't
focus on this more politically. Then
>> the entire political system, as we know,
is a is a short-term game. You know,
you've got a 4-year election cycle. Some
of the big societal problems that we
have, including mental health, are
intergenerational and long-term. And so
it's a it that that basic political
um incentive
often undermines, you know, prevention
is like the dog that ever barks. You
know, everyone talks about it. No one's
willing to invest in it and and I think
but the potential gains are are huge and
you can see that internationally with
the countries that have invested in it.
Even even even uh when you do the
international comparisons of where we
spend money, we spend much more of our
public sector money on than than other
countries on treating and responding to
the problem than we do on health
creation, keeping people in work. Other
countries do do put more money into that
sphere. It's called, you know, health
generation is is an is a part of public
health. It's called salutenesis. It's
it's it's putting in place the um the
the environment that people can can
flourish in. And like you say, um it's
it's not a simple science, but there's
massive payoffs.
Freudenburgger wrote that in every fire,
even a burntout one, there are glowing
embers. You can use them to rekindle the
spark. The causes of burnout, as we've
heard, aren't straightforward. They can
be individual, social, company specific.
They can be economic, political, they
can be psychological, they can be
sociological. My own often comes from an
anxiety about the future that drives me
to work anxiously. For others, the
causes are technology always being on.
They are political. They might be from
economics and inequality. This makes it
difficult to generalize about burnout.
But the fact that it's become so general
necessitates a very general answer. The
very generality of it suggests generally
speaking a broken system. Whether that's
a social system, a political system, or
an economic system, something is clearly
wrong.
Take Han's achievement subject. Han
writes, "The exhausted, depressive
achievement subject grinds itself down.
It's tired, exhausted by itself and at
war with itself, entirely incapable of
stepping outward, of standing outside
itself, of relying on the other, on the
world. It locks its jewels on itself.
Paradoxically, this leads the self to
hollow and empty out. It wears out in a
rat race. It runs against itself. This
is such an insightful quote and it shows
how burnout is often much more complex
than boss needs more work done. Although
it can be that too, but as the Kellogg's
example showed us, we are often all
complicit in some way in a kind of
personal or social or cultural rat race
in our own heads.
For me, the most interesting general
psychological reference point that's
come up frequently in all of this is the
point of recognition. If Han is right,
the ego continues burning itself out
because it's impossible for it to
self-recognize. We always need some kind
of external reference points. Of course,
the profit motive under capitalism, the
race to the bottom, the need to
outperform competitors and squeeze more
out of your workers absolutely
undermines this. But other things do
too. The anxious subject is always
seeking some kind of recognition that's
unavailable to it. Potentially within,
but still unavailable. Remember, we're
not talking about simple, well done
recognition. Recognition is nonsimple.
We embody recognition ourselves. It's
part of us. And there are different
types of recognition. We can be
recognized. We can be seen both
negatively and positively.
As Hegel knew, recognition is conflict,
both good and bad. It's the point where
our inner subject meets the subject of
the other. the outside inside the social
in our heads that regulates how our
individual characters and personalities
become socialized.
The French sociologist Elaine Erenburgg
said with the gospel of personal
development on the one hand and the cult
of performance on the other, conflict
does not disappear. However, it loses
its obvious quality and can no longer be
counted on to guide us. If we can't
exist by recognizing ourselves, if we
cannot be recognized by the system of
work we exist in or the technology we
use, if we are underresourced,
overlabored, if we lack autonomy and
control, the only thing left to do is to
seek that recognition elsewhere in some
other social group, in a union, in a
pressure group, in a protest group, in a
political party. If burnout leads to
cynicism, it could also be that
cynicism, a breakdown in social
recognition in idealism leads
contributes to burnout. Maybe we need to
accept that recognition is lacking or
hidden or transferred in certain places
that the only place to seek that
recognition is in a place which seeks to
fix a broken system, workplace, or
person. Maybe that's the route to
overcoming what seems like an
insurmountable problem. If cynicism is a
lack of meaning, if linear security is
its cure, then positive conflict,
accepting the conflict, being part of
the conflict might be the route to
change.
Pan writes that the late modern
achievement subject is subject to no
one. Maybe this is the great irony of
freedom under modernity. that it's
actually a kind of mirage that we are
never really free and we always need to
seek out to accept and make plain the
recognition and the points of conflict
to to lean into the conflict to let
yourself be recognized in the point of
conflict as part of social life. That
ironically giving up freedom is the
route to feeling more free. that freedom
is a burden that makes us anxious in
many ways. In other words, make yourself
a subject. And I'm being controversial
here because I'd rather poke around in
esoteric and strange and contradictory
ideas that might lead in new directions
than point out something simple like we
just need more resources and that it's
capitalism stupid. The better analysis
always uncovers things through this kind
of deep analysis, through this
overturning that the idea that we might
make ourselves subjects and become
slaves to something, to some higher
social value, to positive change might
be the route, ironically, to making us
feel more free and less burnt out. I
think is a fascinating one. We need to
remember there are many types of
freedom. Freedom has changed over time,
how we think about it and how we live
it. Neoliberal freedom has been sold to
us as the ultimate globalized freedom.
Freedom of global choice in work, play,
travel, dating, entertainment. But it's
freedom of choice which comes with an
unbearable demand to make exactly the
right choice against a whole world of
competitors. If that type of freedom
comes with the moral injury of
insurmountable demands in what feels
like an always shrinking amount of time,
then what sort of freedom is it? There's
a section in EP Thompson's famous book,
The Making of the English Working Class,
that's always stayed with me. It's about
the idea of a moral economy, one that
says to hell with what the market says a
loaf of bread costs. There's always a
just price, a right price. Demands are
philosophically interesting. The whole
world demands things from us. Some we
from the world. There's nothing wrong
with demands. The demands of family life
and friendship, the demands of virtue
and meaningful work. They're unavoidable
and they're good. But if Han is right
about auto exploitation in an
achievement society in which we're
always running free but scattered in our
heads and that we cannot reward
ourselves, maybe we need to give
ourselves over to a bigger moral demand,
a just demand.
These types of moral demands can't be
achieved by ourselves alone. They're
much bigger, much more important. They
take big groups, unions, political
parties or movements, even religious
organizations,
group that have and seek some kind of
moral demand at their core. Maybe it's
time we ditched individualist freedom
and gave ourselves over to the demands
of something bigger.
We must learn from Kelloggs that we are
in a fight together to justify that
4-day week to make the case for it to
make the case for shorter hours or maybe
Friday afternoons off to follow the
evidence which shows quite conclusively
that 4 day weeks are actually more
productive, not less. We're in a
prisoner's dilemma because we're all
scared of being the one that stops
first, that checks out, that demands
change, that stands out from the crowd.
We must become slaves to freedom. We
must become slaves to a group fighting
for change, to be captive to a group and
driven by its demands to recognize the
need for a different work structure.
It might mean organizing, joining a
union, a pressure group. It might mean
putting the case to your boss with your
colleagues. It might mean quitting
altogether. It might mean therapy. It
might mean radical political change. The
point is we need to get involved. These
moral demands of bigger purpose than us
alone demand linear security. If we
think about linear security, we think
about predictability. Laws, regulations,
principles, moral codes. Many things
we've constructed as humans are about
linear predictability, linear security
so that we don't fall victim to the
vicissitudes of bad luck. Socialized
healthcare, pensions, the right to own a
home, trial by jury. All of these are
designed with this in mind so that we
have something predictable that we can
go to when we need it.
In 2014, Zayepon wrote a bestseller on
the good jobs strategy, arguing, showing
that companies that prioritize good pay,
benefit, schedules, employee meaning,
and dignity often actually outperform
the companies that try and cheat these
steps and get cheaper labor and pay
lower wages. She points to companies
where employees report high job
satisfaction, companies like Costco and
Quick Trip and Trader Joe's in America.
And similarly in the UK, many companies
that tried a 4-day week for a study
continued the 4-day week after. Ton
writes that Quick Trip, for example,
offers affordable health care, a stable
schedule, and significant training, and
promotes managers exclusively from
within with corresponding pay increases.
The results are staggering. Its lines
are fast, its customers incredibly
loyal. Its sales per square foot are 50%
higher than the industry average. and
employee turnover is just 13% compared
to 59% amongst the top quarter of the
convenience store industry. Burnout is
the realization of the tortoise and the
hair fable. We all think we have to
sprint to win the race. And sprinting
might mean overwork. It might mean
squeezing employees wages. It might mean
putting off that pay increase or that
promotion. It might mean not raising the
minimum wage out of fear of being out
competed by your competitor down the
road or in China. All the while, the
tortoise a bit more relaxed, a bit more
happy, a bit more satisfied, a bit more
in control of their vocation
slowly overtakes. We're blind to this.
We focus on the immediate instead of the
immediate. We want the quick solution,
and we're terrified of patience. We need
to turn the world upside down to reveal
new ways of doing things. To take the
immediate and turn it into the
immediate. We need to become slaves to
another way of doing things. We need to
give up being endless free achievement
subjects. Avoid cynicism by seeking
meaning in resolute change.
Mark had a great line. He said, "We too
often get sucked into the tyranny of the
urgent over the important. The news
cycle moves on. We spend money on cancer
but not stress prevention. We fear
taking a break. We're scared of giving
employees an extra hour or an extra day
off. We fear the wolf at the door. All
the while ignoring that the walls could
be crumbling from within." Because a lot
of this is structural. I think I get the
sense that a lot of people feel
helpless, unable to affect any kind of
change,
fed up with politics, etc. What do you
think if you could, you know, sum up and
give one message to quote unquote
ordinary people that would help this in
some way, what what would that be? I I
personally think Lewis that
understanding your own inner life and
how you can support good mental health
and that journey towards it I think it's
the most exciting and important journey
we all we all go on in terms of our
human experience and I think there's a
massive loss if you live your whole life
and you haven't engaged with
>> with how could I reduce the things that
are making me anxious and how could I
find a place of more energy and joy in
in my life Um, so I think the number one
thing I would say to people is is to be
courageous to turn and look at the
things that is causing pain. There's a
way to understand mental ill health is
that your brain is telling you something
that is wrong that needs to change in
your life. You know, you may not have
all the power and resources to change
it, but it's trying to tell you
something. It's a warning sign. It's on
your side. So listen to that and then
decide how you're going to respond. What
can you do with compassion to yourself?
A couple of weeks ago, my sort of
father-in-law is 80 years old now, you
know, he went to the doctors for
suspected memory loss. And actually what
they found out was I don't you haven't
got memory loss. What you have is
underlying anxiety that's been that's
very persistent. And here was a man who
said, "Okay, I'm going to go to therapy
age 80 and I'm going to look at those
causes of anxiety." And I thought, you
know, that's incredibly inspiring at at
one level, but also a solitary tale to
for us to say, let's turn and face these
things
where they're causing a problem. Uh, and
there's a lot of hope that you can, I
know, I've seen it. Uh, you can make
progress.
All right, everyone. Thank you so much
as usual for watching and I really
appreciate that you've gotten this far.
Just watching the video really helps
with the algorithm. Um, and a massive
thank you as always to all these
wonderful people on screen now who
support then and now. Um, as I've
already mentioned, it's the only way to
keep doing this without sponsorship.
These long form indepth videos that take
so much time for us to research, put
together, edit, all the rest of it. So,
I am hugely hugely appreciative and
we're trying to make the Patreon
membership more and more valuable to you
um over time by adding courses. There's
already a 2-hour course up on thinking
differently about history that goes in
depth on some of the stuff that
undergraduate and post-graduate history
students read about the craft of
history, about thinking about history.
And I think it's put together really
well. People seem to enjoy it. You can
join and have a look yourself. You can
cancel at any time. Um the course
membership level is $2.99 I think, but
you can join for a dollar and watch ad
free and early. Join the discussion and
the rest of it and support uh videos
like this. If not, please do just press
subscribe, press that bell, like,
comment, share, follow on social media.
All that stuff helps so so much. Now,
I'm going to go back to working on the
next video. Thank you. See you next
time.